The year is 1933, the 10th of March. It is six weeks since the Nazis seized power in
Germany. Dr Michael Siegel, a Jewish lawyer in Munich and father of B Siegel, is going
about his business.
My father went to the police headquarters, I suppose, in order to lay a complaint on
behalf of one of his clients who had been arrested. When he got to the police headquarters,
somebody said to him, Dr Siegel, you're wanted in room number so and so, which happened to
be in the basement, and my father said, fine, I'm in good time, I'll go there first. And
he got there, he saw that it was full of brown shirt thugs who proceeded to beat him up.
They knocked his teeth in and bust his eardrums. They then cut off his trouser legs and took
off his shoes and socks and hung a placard round his neck with the legend, I'm a Jew
and I will never again complain to the police.
March 1938, Germany annexes Austria. A young Evelyn Kaye remembers the moment.
But I think what I remember most is that I've hated the crowd ever since and I don't go near
the crowd and the marching of boots. It's everyone here marching now, still get uptight.
Between 1933 and 1939, 90,000 Jews fled from Central Europe to Britain. Men, women and children
targeted by the Nazis as racially inferior, forced to abandon their homes in Germany, Austria and
Czechoslovakia to seek refuge in the UK. Many of them found sanctuary in Wales, some briefly,
others for the rest of their lives. In this podcast, we look at the connections between
the Holocaust and Wales. We listen to the stories of those who fled from Nazi tyranny
to build better lives for themselves and their families in Wales. We learn about their
contributions to Welsh life, culturally, economically and politically. And we hear
the testimony of Welsh people who bore witness to the barbarism of the Nazi regime.
The Holocaust can seem like a distant event that happened a long time ago in another place,
but it is a part of all of our history. It's a history that is more relevant now than ever,
with the rise of the far-right, anti-Semitism, racism and attacks on human rights becoming
more common in many countries. I'm Maurice Brodie, historian at Aberystwyth University.
The podcast has been created as part of Holocaust Resources Wales, a project between the Centre for
the Movement of People at Aberystwyth University and the Jewish History Association of South Wales
and sponsored by the Association of Jewish Refugees. The voices you will hear are those
of survivors or their children, recorded as part of oral history interviews taken by the Centre
for the Movement of People, the Jewish History Association of South Wales and Imperial War Museums.
In this first episode, we look at Jewish life in Central Europe before the Second World War.
The stories we will hear are those of refugees who fled to Wales in the 1930s.
What were their lives like before they left? How did this change over the course of the decade?
And what was the spark, the writing on the wall, that prompted them to flee?
Let's start with the story of a young German Jewish boy. As a teenager, he will live in a
castle in North Wales. His name is Herman Rothman. Yes, I was born on the 2nd of September 1924
and I was born in Berlin. They sent me to a Jewish school and I had quite a distance to travel. I
traveled by train for about half an hour. It was what they call a Volksschule and it was a Jewish
one and we had a Hebrew education. I had a Hebrew education early date. I went to also to a sports
club called the Bakochpa. The Bakochpa was, apart from doing gymnastics in winter and in summer,
we did athletics. I liked it very much indeed because when you're good at something,
you like it more than anything else. Evelyn Kaye will attend boarding school in Belf Wells in
Poys. Her grandparents in Vienna ran a small theater. And the nursery put on the play
and I was a lily which had, my mother made me the dress and it had these leaves made out of
clay paper and it was quite sweet. It was a bit twee. There was the winter fairy and she had a
long tail and all the flowers were hidden under the tail and then she walked off stage. Each flower
got up and had a little yarn to say and unfortunately my, an anchored one who was much
older than I was, told me some naughty words to say and I couldn't remember the proper words.
So my grandfather wrote down the curtain rather quickly.
Renata Collins, whose name when she was born in 1933 in Prague was Renata Cress,
had parents from both Germany and Czechoslovakia.
She was later fostered by a couple in Porth in South Wales. Well of course my parents
weren't born in Czechoslovakia. My father was born in Germany because his father came to Prague
to work in the bank and my father followed in his footsteps and then my mother was born in Bohemia
and she has pictures which everybody asks me was she an actress but no because that's how they
dressed in Bohemia and I suppose now we look at people and they're dressed way out and we think
oh they're a bit Bohemian and so she was a theatre sister in the Prague Hospital Infirmary whatever
they called it. Des Goulton moved to Treforest near Ponta Pryd with his family in 1939.
He used to attend Jewish services with his grandparents in Zelina which is now part of
Slovakia. My grandfather and my maternal and my paternal grandparents were reasonably religious,
not all were religious but reasonably and they went every Saturday to the service and they took me
so I went there also and many of my friends, my school friends, my school colleagues
came also to the service. Others like Evelyn Kaye remember a secular non-religious Jewish life.
I lived in the Prater, the lower Paltstaff which was a Jewish district. My parents weren't
tably Jewish, they went kosher, they never went to synagogue and we didn't keep any of the festivals.
And funny enough that my father's sisters were very religious and one of them got a bit
apprehensive because I was being caught up in this very godless way.
Soon however these children became targeted because of their Jewish heritage. When the Nazis
seized power in Germany in 1933, open anti-Semitism became a state-sponsored policy.
Let's hear Bea Siegel who became Bea Green again. I think it was in my second year at
primary school, at the state primary school, that unlike the first year we had a teacher
whom I still remember she was called Freula and Felna and she was anti-Semitic. I didn't know what
it meant of course at the time but she said when I asked for, I think it was an exercise book,
can't you Jew kids get your own exercise books? And I thought yes, I'm sure we could. And I went
home to my mum and I said Freula and Felna thinks that we Jew kids could or should get our own
exercise books and it was only then when I noticed that my mother was angry that I thought well maybe
she shouldn't have said that. Bea was later evacuated twice to Wales during the war.
Laura Confino was also evacuated to Wales but lived in Frankfurt in Germany during the Nazi rise to
power. As far as I remember I enjoyed going to school and I had friends and it was all very nice
and at that time my mother was still alive and she and my form teacher were very good friends
because they were both very interested in books and so on and so it was a very nice atmosphere
but then as Hitler came into power things started to change and that is that the
teacher whose name was Herr Knauf I remember sort of absent it himself. He didn't gradually,
he didn't want to know my mother or my father anymore and at school itself every morning when
we turned up in class there was the picture of Hitler on the wall above the pulpit and we had
to stand there with outstretched arms and say hi Hitler and the atmosphere changed completely
and friends I had been sort of going to their houses and we were always together playing
and suddenly they didn't want to know me anymore and so obviously you found it very hard to
understand why should it happen that one day we were good friends and the next day they didn't
want to know anymore. The Nazis began arresting their political opponents and Jews and sending
them to detention centers known as concentration camps. These camps were outside the German legal
system meaning detainees could be held indefinitely. Hermann Rothman remembers his first encounter
with them after a family friend was arrested. We had friends who were of German extraction
but Jewish and they were very friendly. He was an architect and that on one occasion
the door opened and the woman came in and she cried and my parents asked her in and so on,
give her a drink and so on and what happened and she said they arrested her husband and they took
him to concentration camp. Now my parents consoled her and said well perhaps after a time they would
release them and everything will be all right and she left and then shortly afterwards then
it was another knock in the door and she was in absolute tears and she showed them a letter which
said if you from person in charge of the concentration camp saying it be informed you hereby that your
husband has had a heart attack and he died would you send us eight marks so that we can bury him
or commit him. That's the letter which she showed us and of course she was in tears and so there I
felt the first effect of death by the Nazis. The Nazis soon had designs beyond the German borders.
In 1938 they invaded Austria and proclaimed it a part of Germany. This was the Anschluss. Hans
Albrecht who later lived in Llandudno remembers soldiers walking past his house in Linz. Yeah I
passed past my house and I remember the wine list and women people raising their heads,
lifting their hands and throwing lots of flowers to the Nazis. And Mrs. Wine Lister,
a Nazi, she told that the lady who came to Walshcross, she said don't Walshcross with
dirty swine, the Jews. I remember that as well. In November 1938 the situation for German and
Austrian Jews worsened dramatically. A Polish Jew living in Paris, Herschel Grinspan,
assassinated a German official. In response a wave of violence was unleashed against the Reich's
Jewish population. Shops were smashed, synagogues burned down and 30,000 Jews were rounded up and
sent to concentration camps. The night of the 9th and 10th November became known as Kristallnacht,
the night of broken glass. Laura Confino. And then for me personally the climax came at Kristallnacht
which was the 10th of November 1938 when they came to us with long iron bars and my father stood at
the front door and he had pinned his iron crosses and his decorations on his lapel
and he thought that would show them that he had fought in the war and they would leave us alone.
But they pushed my grandparents and my father and myself, my brother had left by then to France,
into the kitchen and they started smashing up our home and obviously there was a lot of noise and
we were all frightened and my grandmother thought we were all going to be killed.
And then after they'd finished what they wanted to do they left and suddenly it was all quiet
and we sort of came out of the kitchen and when I saw what our home looked like and it was all
cluttered up and smashed up and it looked awful and I remember I looked around and I said to my
father I'm not going to stay here and I walked out and they tried to keep me back because they
didn't know what was going on in the street and so on but I just felt I can't stay here.
The pogrom took place all over the German Reich including Austria. Evelyn Kay and Hans Albrecht
Well I remember the boots again we lived on a second floor flat and the knocking on the door
and they took my father and then they marched up in the block of flats and they took other people
who never came back. Well I remember the Nazis came to my house to arrest my father
and when they came to my house I said to my mother are the wicked people here again
and they took all the jewelry out of her house. Julius Weill who later moved to Merthyr Tidful
had celebrated his Bar Mitzvah to synagogue in Cologne just two weeks earlier. It was the last
Bar Mitzvah to take place at the synagogue before it was destroyed. Well I wasn't out and about when
it happened but all the sort of Jewish businesses in Cologne were smashed up, windows broken,
more or less closed down. My synagogue, well all the synagogues were trashed, burned and smashed up.
The school I went to which was sort of attached to one of the synagogues was also completely destroyed.
Herman Rothman's family had been hiding with a relative on the outskirts of Berlin on the night of the pogrom.
We came back and we went we traveled to Berlin and we saw the havoc which was made of Jewish
properties. We saw the shops being the glass destroyed, everything looted from these from
the shops and so on. It was a dreadful sight for a child, I was a child really, to see all this
and to observe it. In a bid to humiliate them further the Nazis made Jews clean up the mess.
Evelyn Kay. My mother who never learned any sense, the Nazis got rid of the Jews you know when they
were scrubbing the streets with toothbrushes and tried to pull her away and she wouldn't come
so they got her out of her to scrub and all these people were then deported to a concentration camp.
Terrified Jews began fleeing the German Reich. Kristallnacht was the clearest indication yet
that Jews were no longer safe in Germany or Austria. Soon Jews in Czechoslovakia were also
under threat. The Munich Agreement in September 1938 had handed the Sudetenland in the northwest
of the country over to Germany. In March 1939 the Wehrmacht marched into Prague.
The Nazis now controlled the whole of Czechoslovakia.
Des Goulton.
Few days later the Germans actually marched in and I could see the columns of the Germans
marching into Prague and there was where we are living a boarding on a wall and there were various
posters placed there and the Germans used to use it to write posters and I remember that they
used the Czech language but it was particularly badly written so I think they went out of the way
to humiliate the Czech people by writing Czech notices in a bad language because there was no
shortage of people who could have written it in a perfect Czech. Less than six months after the
invasion of Prague, Europe was in flames. Once the Second World War began, escape from the German
Reich became almost impossible. Jewish communities were trapped with little hope of rescue.
The voices you have heard in this episode were able to flee to Britain and to Wales before this
happened. In the next episode we discover how these refugees managed to get out of Nazi-occupied
Europe and what their journey was like.
Until next time, thanks for listening.